We consider the most important of the select committees here in the New Zealand
Parliament. Of course, New Zealand takes a keen interest across the Pacific and
indeed the world, and having you here is something of special importance to us.
We appreciate the time is short for us, and you might see one or two members
shift around as you would have heard the bells ring as our parliament continues
to sit. But can I just extend a warm welcome to you all, every single one of you
who have come along to engage in a discussion that I think is one that's long
overdue, and acknowledge too the challenges that not only affect the Pacific
wider but of course, your beautiful country, I had a chance to go there and go
to a few weddings. But anyway, that's another story. But welcome, and I'll hand
back over to our chair to get our meeting going.
Thank you, Peeni. Thank you very much. And welcome to Mr. Speaker, honourable
Stephen dorrike Felix, it's very nice to have you here and your entourage, and
particularly from myself to marae Louise, who we had dinner with last night. So
nice to see you today as the only female MP in the Vanuatu parliament. So it's
nice to have you with us as well. We are very happy to hear from you and to
perhaps you can, you can introduce your team and start the discussion with us.
We're we're welcome to to have a chat.
Thank you, Madam, chairman of the committee and all members. Thank you for the
welcome. Yes, I've been in office for just about 13 months. But My name is the
only female member of parliament representing the constituency of Portugal, with
honourable Barry Glen, honourable Jones, Member of Parliament representing the
constituency of an island, the second biggest island of the country, maikula.
And
also the chairman of the committee on economics, foreign policy.
Welcome
Danny Silas. He's a member for the our last group of islands further north, plus
the Solomon Islands, the banks and Taurus as vice chairman of a committee on
Constitutional Affairs, and few members from my Cabinet and also my wife, all of
them do think first time in general, except for me and my wife, we've enjoyed
our time here in Wellington and few more places to visit up not before we go
back home, but we thank you for the opportunity to be able to sit with your your
committee today. And I agree that, you know, it's an important committee, and
the work that committees do in parliamentary democracy is a important work in
the oversight function in the security of government policies and its
orientations. So thank you for the opportunity. We've had two of our work piece
came across for the scripting week last year.
Yes,
and we hope to have more of these exchanges to be able to develop the different
skills that we all need to acquire to be able to perform or functions as
representative of the people, to make important decisions for the people's
interests, not only in our respective countries, but also in our region. Very
important. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. And of course, we note the work that you will have had to
do since the earthquake. And I understand from your colleague that you relocated
your parliament to a resort for the time being as it was damaged. How terrible,
I hope. But of course, in very terrible circumstances, so I'm keen to hear how
the recovery is going from there.
Yes, it was a very tough decision for me to take to move the session of
parliament Alba chamber for the first time in our history. But yeah, the
recovery is still slowly coming back. We've completed our renovation, repair of
the main chamber. So when I go back for my trip, they will land over the
chamber, back to the Speaker's office, so that we can start moving, you know,
but we stress our appreciation to the regional parliament and everyone supported
us, even through this difficult times. You know, the support that they will
receive through the United Nation level programme
from
the regional government, but also other infrastructure projects around that
they've assisted, as we saw and we look forward. Mentioned that to the to the to
the speaker, about developing further the TI programme. Trying to do strengthen
the I had a discussions with the Minister of Pacific people yesterday and
informed him of initiation that was done in Fiji for the intention of grouping
all the Pacific Island countries, including Australia and New Zealand, in a
smaller groups. We all member of the Parliament, Association and the
parliamentary Union, but we don't have a strong voice together. We need to come
together before we go to this original organisation, so we can strongly voice
our concerns as far as regional difference concern. So there's another platform
thing. We had our first meeting in Fiji, the next one will be in papaeto in
Tahiti this year. So I will be attending with the members of Parliament from
both sides of the house, and I hope that all speakers come with a fair
representation of all the MP so they can have a space where they discuss issues
that are very common to everybody, as far as our region is concerned, but as far
as the recovery is, we have now been counting the number of the committee rooms
you have here. We don't, I think you only have three. And managing, I currently
now occupy one of the committee rooms of my as my temporary office,
right?
I have to relocate because of the and we hope that by May, which is going to be
our first year session, the ceremonial session, we will move back to the
chamber, but we still there. We've transformed our library into our temporary
chamber. So
yes, indeed, yes. Do we have some questions? Peeni,
you talk about the collective voice and the strength of collective voice in the
Pacific, that's important in particular, and what's happening around the world
right now. But I wonder if New Zealand in particular are supporting you enough
so that your voice is heard. When I know having been a former Defence Minister,
when we when people think of the Pacific, they instantly think about New Zealand
and Australia and voices of our sovereign nations like yourselves and others
samua Tonga often get lost. I wonder if, if you've got any thoughts on how we
might be able to support strength in your voice on the international stage.
Yes, I agree that. You know, I happen to be, at one time, our representative in
the international maratime
organisation,
and New Zealand hosted a Pacific breakfast once, you know, just before the
election of the assembly. And I saw that, you know, the importance of So, I
think we are relying on the leadership of Australia and New Zealand that's
pulling all the Pacific Island countries. We are sovereign powers and you know,
but sometimes it's difficult for us to negotiate by ourselves, unless we go
along with those who are more influential than others. So I think that's a very
important point to make. But I think in New Zealand and Australia, of course,
from now, already, ready. It's just mother of us, know, seeing the importance
and the need so that we can organise ourselves. And that's in the last meeting
in Fiji. We had a couple of MP from New Zealand who attended the meeting with
Yes, I think the the being part of the organisations as such, and also assisting
in in leading what are we also find is that as far as regional international
politics is concerned, the level of Understanding in the Pacific Island
countries, it's important that you have more exchanges, more trade exposure, so
that they understand what's happening out there. Sometimes we are confined to a
small wall, and we think, you know what everything is. I think that's why I
think this type of changes. We come out from our islands, we come to New
Zealand, Australia, and we see things differently. It's important for that,
if I may supplement Yes, thank
you.
We know that the international conflict in the Middle East is going to increase
fuel and energy prices. Often at the end of the chain is the Pacific. Yes,
because of all the oil and fossil fuel has to come down here, processed, all
crystalline, um.